---
title: "Three super-Earths and a possible water world from TESS and ESPRESSO"
collection: publications
permalink: /publication/2024-06-10_ESPPRESSOx3
excerpt: 'This paper presents the confirmation and characterization of TOI-260 b, a super-Earth in the radius valley; and TOI-286 b and c, a super-Earth and water world spanning the radius valley. We also update parameters for the known super-Earth TOI-134 b.'
date: 2024-06-10
venue: 'Astronomy & Astrophysics'
paperurl: 'https://www.aanda.org/articles/aa/full_html/2024/08/aa50505-24/aa50505-24.html'
citation: 'Hobson, M.J. et al. (2024). &quot;Three super-Earths and a possible water world from TESS and ESPRESSO&quot; <i>Astronomy & Astrophysics</i>, 688, A216.'
---
*Context*. Since 2018, the ESPRESSO spectrograph at the VLT has been hunting for planets in the Southern skies via the radial velocity (RV) method. One of its goals is to follow up candidate planets from transit surveys such as the TESS mission, with particular focus on small planets for which ESPRESSO’s RV precision is vital.

*Aims*. We aim to confirm and characterize in detail three super-Earth candidate transiting planets from TESS using precise RVs from ESPRESSO.

*Methods*. We analyzed photometry from TESS and ground-based facilities, high-resolution imaging, and RVs from ESPRESSO, HARPS, and HIRES, to confirm and characterize three new planets: TOI-260 b, transiting a late K-dwarf, and TOI-286 b and c, orbiting an early K-dwarf. We also update parameters for the known super-Earth TOI-134 b (L 168-9 b), which is hosted by an M-dwarf.

*Results*. TOI-260~b has a $$13.475853^{+0.000013}_{-0.000011}$$ d period, $$4.23 \pm1.60 \,\mathrm{M_\oplus}$$ mass and $$1.71\pm0.08\,\mathrm{R_\oplus}$$ radius. For TOI-286~b we find a $$4.5117244^{+0.0000031}_{-0.0000027}$$ d period, $$4.53\pm0.78\,\mathrm{M_\oplus}$$ mass and $$1.42\pm0.10\,\mathrm{R_\oplus}$$ radius; for TOI-286~c, a $$39.361826^{+0.000070}_{-0.000081}$$ d period, $$3.72\pm2.22\,\mathrm{M_\oplus}$$ mass and $$1.88\pm 0.12\,\mathrm{R_\oplus}$$ radius. For TOI-134~b we obtain a $$1.40152604^{+0.00000074}_{-0.00000082}$$ d period, $$4.07\pm0.45\,\mathrm{M_\oplus}$$ mass, and $$1.63\pm0.14\,\mathrm{R_\oplus}$$ radius. Circular models are preferred for all the planets, although for TOI-260~b the eccentricity is not well-constrained. We compute bulk densities and place the planets in the context of composition models.

*Conclusions*. TOI-260 b lies within the radius valley, and is most likely a rocky planet. However, the uncertainty on the eccentricity and thus on
the mass renders its composition hard to determine. TOI-286 b and c span the radius valley, with TOI-286 b lying below it and having a likely
rocky composition, while TOI-286 c is within the valley, close to the upper border, and probably has a significant water fraction. With our updated
parameters for TOI-134 b, we obtain a lower density than previous findings, giving a rocky or Earth-like composition.

[Download paper here (arXiv)](https://arxiv.org/pdf/2406.06278)

