---
title: "The small transiting planet population revealed by ESPRESSO with extreme precision radial velocities"
collection: publications
permalink: /publication/2026-05_22_WG3
excerpt: 'This paper presents an overview of the transiting planet follow-up programe carried out by the ESPRESSO consortium.'
date: 2026-05-22
venue: 'Astronomy & Astrophysics'
paperurl: 'https://arxiv.org/abs/2605.27002'
citation: 'Hobson, M.J. et al. (2026). &quot;The small transiting planet population revealed by ESPRESSO with extreme precision radial velocities&quot; <i>Astronomy & Astrophysics</i>, in press.'
---
*Context*. Small planets are extremely common in the Galaxy, including planets with masses and radii between those of Earth and Neptune. Characterizing these planets’ masses requires ultra-precise radial velocities. The ESPRESSO spectrograph was designed and built for this purpose.

*Aims*. We present an overview of the ESPRESSO Guaranteed Time Observations transit follow-up sub-program, aimed at confirming and characterizing small transiting planet candidates from the K2 and TESS space missions. 

*Methods*. We analyse the global stellar and planetary properties of the sample of 65 planets in 30 systems characterized by this sub-program. This includes six systems presented in this paper, for which we either obtain only upper mass limits, or provide updates to previously published parameters. We also place this sample in the context of the overall population of precisely characterized small planets.

*Results*. Separating the population into insolation regimes, we find a tentative mass threshold at $$6 \,\mathrm{M_\oplus}$$ for the rocky to volatile-rich composition transition in the medium-insolation regime, and a population of likely stripped massive rocky planets in the high-insolation regime. We likewise find a correlation between planet mass and stellar metallicity, with more massive planets being hosted by more metal-rich stars. We also explore the radius valley, finding that planets below the gap have a tighter mass distribution. We compare planet masses with typical protoplanetary disk masses and draw tentative conclusions about likely formation conditions. Finally, we discuss the impact of our observing strategy on our results.

*Conclusions*. The ESPRESSO transit follow-up sub-program has been highly productive, characterizing a diverse population of small planets that allows us to identify population-level features. Likewise, the lessons learned from this sub-program will be valuable for PLATO follow-up planning.

[Download paper here (arXiv)](https://arxiv.org/abs/2605.27002)

